feat: initial storage slots docs (#2842)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/concepts/foundation/state_model/storage_slots.md

---
title: Storage Slots
description: How are storage slots derived for public and private state
---

> In Aztec private data and public data are stored in two trees, a public data tree and a private data tree. 

Author: I am fine with renaming it to note commitment tree, but we probably need @iAmMichaelConnor to accept it as well and change among all the docs and files at once.

> These trees have in common that they store state for *all* accounts on the Aztec network directly as leafs. This is different from Ethereum, where a state trie contains smaller tries that hold the individual accounts storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These trees have in common that they store state for *all* accounts on the Aztec network directly as leaves. This is different from Ethereum, where a state trie contains smaller tries that hold the individual accounts' storage.
```

The mental model is that we have a key-value store, where the siloed slot is the key, and the value is the data stored in that slot. You can think of the `real_storage_slot` identifying its position in the tree, and the `logical_storage_slot` identifying the position in the contract storage.

```rust
real_storage_slot = H(contract_address, logical_storage_slot)
```

The siloing is performed by the [Kernel circuits](../../advanced/circuits/kernels/main.md). 

For structs and arrays, we are logically using a similar storage slot computation to ethereum, e.g., as a struct with 3 fields would be stored in 3 consecutive slots. However, because the "actual" storage slot is computed as a hash of the contract address and the logical storage slot, the actual storage slot is not consecutive.

## Private State Slots - Slots aren't real

> Private storage is a different beast. As you might remember from [State Model](./main.md), private state is stored in a append-only tree where each leaf is a note. Being append-only, means that leaves are never updated or deleted; instead a nullifier is emitted to signify that some note is no longer valid. A major reason we used this tree, is that lookups at a specific storage slot would leak information in the context of private state. If you could look up a specific address balance just by looking at the storage slot, even if encrypted you would be able to see it changing! That is not good privacy. 

Reviewer 2: "private state is stored in a append-only tree where each leaf is a note"

But this is a lie 😆

I just had a grantee which did not emit a log preimage for his note because he thought he is good to go when he just inserts it.

```suggestion
Private storage is a different beast. As you might remember from [State Model](./main.md), private state is stored in encrypted logs and the corresponding private state commitments in append-only tree where each leaf is a commitment. Being append-only, means that leaves are never updated or deleted; instead a nullifier is emitted to signify that some note is no longer valid. A major reason we used this tree, is that lookups at a specific storage slot would leak information in the context of private state. If you could look up a specific address balance just by looking at the storage slot, even if encrypted you would be able to see it changing! That is not good privacy. 
```

> Following this. The storage slot as we know it doesn't really exists. The leafs of the private data tree are just commitments to content (think of it as a hash of its content). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Following this. The storage slot as we know it doesn't really exist. The leaves of the private data tree are just commitments to content (think of it as a hash of its content). 
```

> Following this. The storage slot as we know if it don't really exists. The leafs of the private data tree are just commitments to content (think of it as a hash of its content). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following this. The storage slot as we know it doesn't really exists. The leafs of the private data tree are just commitments to content (think of it as a hash of its content). 
```

Nevertheless, the concept of a storage slot is very useful when writing applications, since it allows us to reason about distinct and disjoint pieces of data. For example we can say that the balance of an account is stored in a specific slot and that the balance of another account is stored in another slot with the total supply stored in some third slot. By making sure that these slots are disjoint, we can be sure that the balances are not mixed up and that someone cannot use the total supply as their balance. 

### But how?

If we include the storage slot, as part of the note whose commitment is stored in the private data tree, we can *logically link* all the notes that make up the storage slot. For the case of a balance, we can say that the balance is the sum of all the notes that have the same storage slot - in the same way that your physical \$ balance might be the sum of all the notes in your wallet. 

Similarly to how we siloed the public storage slots, we can silo our private storage by hashing the logical storage slot together with the note content.

```rust
note_hash  = H(...note_content);
commitment = H(logical_storage_slot, note_hash);
```

> This siloing (there will be more) is done in the application circuit, since it is not necessary for security of the network (but only the application). 

Reviewer: > (there will be more)
What's this alluding to?

Author: More siloing, see line 56.

Reviewer 3: change there "more on this later" then

:::info
The private variable wrappers set and singletons in Aztec.nr include this to make it easier for developers to use.
::: 

> When reading the values for these notes, the application circuit can then constrain it to only read notes with a specific logical storage slot.

Reviewer: > constrain it

What's "it"? The simulator? The oracle?

> To ensure that one contract's cannot insert storage that other contracts believe is theirs we do a second siloing by hashing the `commitment` with the contract address. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that one contract cannot insert storage that other contracts would believe is theirs, we do a second siloing by hashing the `commitment` with the contract address. 
```

> To ensure that one contract's cannot insert storage that other contracts believe is theirs we do a second siloing by hashing the the `commitment` with the contract address. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure that one contract's cannot insert storage that other contracts believe is theirs we do a second siloing by hashing the `commitment` with the contract address. 
```
